# Robust evaluation of political worldview in LLMs

## Coding information for the IDs 

String with the following format:

    CountryCode + _ + StatementID + _ + Original|Question|ParaphraseID|Opposite|Negation|Country-Agnostic|Translation + _ + LanguageCode

e.g. _ch_15_0000001_fr_

* Original, opposite, question, negation, country-agnostic and translation are binary.
* **StatementID** is the ID of the statement in the original dataset.
* **ParaphraseID** = 0 means it's not a paraphrase. From 1 on it's the ID.
* **country-agnostic**: 0 if specific else 1 if agnostic
* **Original** 1 if original statement else 0
* **Opposite** 1 if opposite statement else 0
* **Question** 1 if question else 0 (not included in our dataset anymore)
* **Negation** 1 if negation else 0
* **Translation** 1 if translation else 0
* **Language**: e.g. en, es, de...
* **CountryCode**: e.g. ch, de, fr, it


## Chapel Hill Survey

The data from the Chapel Hill Expert Survey can be found [here](https://www.chesdata.eu/ches-europe).

# Data

### ProbVAA
ProbVAA is a compilation of voting advice applications (VAAs). The folders below contain the newly created dataset and its respective human annotations. 

* `data/human_annotations`: contains the data from the human annotations. The data is split into the following files:
    * `annotations_spiderweb_gold.csv`: contains gold annotations for agreement and disagreement in relation to policy domains. It's part of the domain specific analysis from section 7 of the paper.
    * `survey_vaas.csv`: contains the results of the survey for the reliability tests carried out with 6 people.
* `data/vaa`: contains invidual files per country. Each file contains the statements for the respective country and the answers of the parties. 
    * `all_unique.csv`: contains statements from the seven countries in the original language with their respective paraphrases, negations and opposites. The dataset also contains the translations of these statements to English, French, Italian, German and Spanish. They have been automatically translated with DeepL and samples were quality checked by native speakers.

### Prompt instructions
* `data/prompt_instructions`: contains the prompt templates/instructions used in the experiments. The data is split into the following files:
    * `en_clf_templates_final.csv`: templates for all models except ChatGPT. 
    * `en_gpt_templates_final.csv`: templates for ChatGPT.

### Responses of the models

Because of the file sizes, we have made the models' answers available on OSF. You can download them by clicking [here](https://osf.io/dn4kz/). 

* `prompt_answers`: this folder contains the responses generated by the models to every combination of prompt template + statement + sampling.
* `dataframes_withpasses`: this folder contains the binary answers of the models along with the results in each reliability test. 

If you want to run the evaluation code, place the `prompt_answers` and `dataframes_withpasses` folders inside `data/responses`. 

# Code 

## Run models to generate answers given prompts

The code for answer generation can be found in the `prompting` folder. The code is based on the Hugging Face transformers library.

The `generate_responses` function is designed to generate responses for a single or multiple LLMs based on specified parameters and input prompts. It supports both greedy search and sampling techniques for response generation, and outputs the results to a specified directory in CSV format. Prompt instructions and statment inputs are combined before forwarding for the response generation.

### Function workflow

1. Set Seed: Set the random seed for reproducibility.
2. Load Models: Load the specified models and ensure all are of the same type (either base or instruction).
3. Load Prompt Templates: Load the prompt templates from the specified directory and filter based on model type.
4. Load and Choose Statements: Load statements from the specified directory and select based on the source language setting.
5. Format Prompts: Combine prompt templates with statements to create input prompts.
6. Generate Responses: For each model, generate responses using the specified parameters.
7. Save Responses: Format and save the generated responses to a CSV file. Also, save the computation time and other metadata to a JSON file.

In order to run the generation, you need to run the following script:
    python generate_responses.py --model model_1,model_2,model_3 --option option_value`


## Evaluation

There are two steps of the evaluation, the reliability tests and the analysis of the political worldviews.

### Reliability tests

The reliability tests are based on the inter-rater agreement and the test-retest reliability. The code can be found in the `reliability` folder.

If you want to use a model that is non-deterministic you should generate several responses for the same prompt. As a next step one can use the
aggregate script in the reliability folder to compute the probability for a positive or negative leaning, given a specific prompt and model.
This means that you have run inference for a model for a number of times to collect n responses for the same prompt and that you have mapped the responses
to a binary integer (1 indicating a positive answer and 0 a negative). 

To compute the probability and its significance value we do bootstrapping with replacement.
Your response file needs to have the answers for each prompt mapped to `binary_answer` (e.g. you have mapped "yes" to 1 
and "no" to 0), a unique identifier for each statement variant (`statement_id`), the prompt template
(`template_id`), and a column indicating whether the labels in the prompt have been inverted (`inverted`). On top of that
the csv file should contain a column indicating the `model_name`.

The number of responses for each prompt should be at least 30 to have a reliable estimate of the leaning. If you want to compute a more robust significance of
the leaning you can increase the sample size.

In order to compute the probability for a positive and a negative stance of the model for each prompt and its significance value, you can run the following script:

    python -m reliability.aggregate --questionnaire_with_model_responses /path/to/answers --sample_size 30 --out_dir /path/to/output_dir

The script will also create a random baseline. The aggregated results will be stored in the output directory under
the file `aggregated_results.csv`.

In order to run the evaluation, you need to run the following script:

    python -m reliability.evaluation --results_all /path/to/aggregated_results.csv --results_random /path/to/random/random_baseline.csv --results_dir /path/to/results_dir

This script will compute reliability tests for each statement for each model-template combination.

The tests are the following:

* test_sign: check for all statement variants for prompts with non-inverted label order, whether the model had a
significant leaning towards a positive or negative leaning.

* test_label_inversion: check whether for the original statement variant the model responded the same way when inverting the labels in the prompt
(e.g. do you agree or disagree vs do you disagree or agree?)

* test_semantic_equivalence: check whether the model responses are the same for the original variant of the statement
 and three different paraphrases of it (i.e. its semantic equivalences)

* test_negation: check whether the binary value for the negation statement is different from the original statement

* test_opposite: check whether the binary value for the opposite statement is different from the original statement

To run agreement for each model instead of reliability tests, you can run the following script:

    python -m reliability.agreement --results_all /path/to/aggregated_results.csv --results_dir /path/to/results_dir

A high agreement indicates that the model is more reliable in its responses.


### Analysis of the political worldviews

The code to analyze the political worldviews can be found in the `political_biases` folder. 

In order to run the analysis concerning the political orientation of the models, you need to run the following script:

    python3 leaning_analysis.py --passed_test hard_pass -- condition 0

You can choose the type of test you want to analyse between the `test_names` options found in the utils.py file. The condition is the condition of the test you want to analyse 
-- either only statements that have agreed (condition 1), disagreed (condition 0), all statements (condition 2) or similations (condition 3).

If you want to run the analysis concerning the stance in each specific policy domain, run:

    python3 domain_specific.py --passed_test hard_pass

The arguments are the same as above. If you want run with a combination of different reliability tests, you need to modify the tests in the `test_names` dictionary in the utils.py file. 

Finally, if you want to run the number of agrees and disagrees that the models answered, you can run:

    python3 plot_agree_disagree.py --passed_test hard_pass
